[Music]
after my biggest loss in my life which
is losing my son
with 18 years old
i
was confused for a while about three or
four years
in a dark
thinking about suicide or thinking about
drugs thinking about
you know what's the purpose of life
and i realize with huxo's departure
we may never not have tomorrow tomorrow
may never happen
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory today i am joined by a
living legend this man's life is so
extraordinary the one the only master
hickson gracie
thank you tom thank you so much for
being here dude i
read your book cover to cover i was
blown away i watched the documentary
choke i knew who you were before i read
your book and before i saw the
documentary
but this was
performance on
a level the note i took was this is a
person who's actually made use of his
full potential
it is really extraordinary what you've
accomplished in jiu-jitsu thank you i
mean the gracie name at this point is
synonymous with jiu jitsu yes in large
part thanks to just your unbelievable
accomplishments
we'll get into some of the specifics for
sure as we go but there was one moment
in the documentary
that defined for me why you're so
different
than
everyone i've ever met and that is
you're you were in a championship fight
but the way that it was was it was
rounds back to bauer fights back to back
so you would beat one opponent then
you'd get paired with another opponent
and so you and this other guy each had i
think two full fights before you met
yeah and he had been punched in the face
so many times yes that he couldn't see
and in the locker room somebody in your
corner said you've got to punch him and
do you remember what you said yes
said i don't i don't want it and i don't
need to hurt him to win the fight
because i felt compelling based on
he's a warrior he's a tough guy he's
lighter
he previous fight against uh
a hull a dutch guy who is very mean and
and
and dirty and poke his finger poke his
eye with the finger
and uh he was hurt
and he won this fight after about about
of 30 minutes or 40 minutes for a fight
and then he fought another big wrestler
who's also
and then he end up in the finals with me
was an eight-man tournament
and my my training partners my my my
people say oh you have to kill this guy
pancho said i don't i don't have to be
violent on this guy
because i'm not intimidated by him the
opportunity is based on striking so i
will be gentle because i believe i'm
more technical than him
and i can win so that's what i did
and this was a very interesting
because japanese are very
particular in observing details moral
details personality ego
you know brutality
and after that match
the press recognized my my kindness
and uh in the spirit of the true samurai
which was
not exactly
overpowered you know you just do what
you have to do in a loyal and and
nice battle
and that was the thing that i found so
interesting in your whole journey and
even when you ask your brothers and
cousins like what are the things that
made you so special
you hear that idea of spirituality a lot
like he really understood his body he
understood like the transcendent nature
of the fight
and seeing that
the the honor of that and that for you
fighting seemed to be connected to
something else
how do you conceptualize fighting
because there were times where i mean
you've said many times i am prepared to
die literally die in this fight yes so
how does the same guy that's prepared to
die to protect his honor
say i don't have to be violent to win
this fight
yes because
for me
i was never
prepared myself to be a fighter
i was not seeking for elements to win an
opponent
i was representing jiu jitsu
you know
i was not seeking for learning box or
learning elements to just be prepared
with all the in all the corners to to
defeat my opponent and i event to make
money or so i was there to fight for
free to represent the art to just
acknowledge the fact
what have been practiced is a legacy
from my family
which brings a technique which enhances
the weaker one and a fight to give
possibilities so i was focused on
representing the family representing the
style
with this being said
you you pick just a fight but if you get
any
achievement
if you want to buy a car if you want to
buy get a girlfriend if you want to
buy a house if you want to get a new job
whatever endeavor you focus on
is somehow a challenge
somehow
a battle somehow
you have to use martial arts you have to
use the ability to because martial arts
give you tools
the tools are
connection
base
deflection
strategy
emotional control
the capacity for you to to over to
visualization
and other elements so
if you want to buy a car you have to use
a strategy the same way you use
to
to win a fight you have to see how much
you have to put in the car
everything else after that so basically
in order for you to achieve happiness
you have to be
strategically correct
capable to control emotions you have to
be focused you have to be perseverance
nothing coming easier for free
so and happiness is always
changing what makes you happy today
10 years from now it's not going to be
the same thing you're going to be have
different goals different expectations
so in order for you to really feel
happy you have to be present
you have to have a goal
my goal always been representing my
family and that's make me happy to go in
a challenge situation to represent my
family to be able to
to bring everything i got
in a positive mission in my in my
you said that being born in gracie
put a lot of expectations on you yeah
you fought in no holds barred
tournaments which is important for
people to understand you fought where
people would show up at your training
facility to challenge you and show up to
hurt you yes and how with all that
expectation with so much physically
riding on the line in so many of these
fights how did you control your mind
like how do you get control of the field
yes i think i think what's
crucial for me was the
the deep understanding
all my practice all my talent all my
physicality
is not going to be enough
all my thinking all my emotional control
all my strategy
is not going to be enough
all my surrender all my capacity to
accept death
is not going to be enough if they come
in long
separate
i think we have to in order for us to
grow as a spirit of warriors no matter
if it's physical
or
just theoretical
your growth
to facilitate your life to conquer
things to be happy
you have to have a good unified body in
terms of
body mind spirit
you have to understand your physicality
you have to understand your mind
you have to understand your spirituality
because those three things combined
make you feel powerful
how
i could engage in a fight a serious
fight like that
with no time limits no weight division
no no rules basically no mount peace no
no cups no
so you basically go for a
unpredictable situation how i could go
just by be trained with a guy 60 70
pounds heavier than me
so just being prepared just being talent
is not enough
just be able to focus and be
strategically correct is not enough i
have to have this spirituality to say
today is a great day to be in a battle
if i have to part to depart today from
another from a different
different dimension
i would be grateful to get here that far
so i was accepting death in order to be
comfortable in hell
because how a fireman can leave home
disregarding the possibility he can be
the last day
because he can be and try to save a kid
in a building and die
how a police officer can leave home
without knowing
the possibilities he may have to get
shot
if you don't realistically believe on
those possibilities you should not be a
police officer you should not be a
fireman you should not be a fighter like
myself in that kind of
perspective of unpredictability
being an athlete
being a sport like a judo or mma which
has rules as time limits has weight
divisions those are pretty much
predictable
is a sports a very interesting a very
brutal a very contact a very
aggressive sport but it's still a sport
martial arts transcends that
because martial arts i have to feed my
students
with unpredictable situations for them
to start to realize they have a chance
when everything is go dark when
everything goes like
if i have a knife against you so i don't
know what you do so pay attention come
just put your hand here so i start to
build up confidence i start to build up
situations where the guy will feel
i supposed to be dead here but i have a
chance i so building that windows of
opportunity windows of chances
i've been creating myself as a confident
and possibilities
so i'm not going there to lose or to
compete i go there to to preach or to do
what i know
and be sure i'm going to win so in my
mind was no defeat was no
was just victory and that's it because
i believe
what i do is perfect
now what makes that so interesting is
that i know at um i think you were
14-ish you were in a fight
you the you had kneed the guy in the
face and you said he just spit his teeth
out and was still ready to fight and you
were like that was so troubling to you
that at round break you were like i
don't want to go back in and your dad
pushed you yeah that was my first
professional fight i was 19 years old
the guy was
30-something oh he has 120 fights
and four draws so 120 victories and four
draws you know he was never been
defeated wow
and my father pulled me to ios crazy
about representing and he kind of
received a call from the the manager
of the this other guy
and he set up i said no i'm sorry i
don't have nobody to fight
and then i said dad please put me in
pull me and pull me and i said i have a
kid here 19 years old
and the and the manager said no master
this guy is professional he's a very
tough guy
and as the guy tried to take my my my
father out of the deal
my father got excited because he felt
like oh i'm gonna have to put this kid
to prove himself but he's good he can
handle so he set up a fight with me
with this guy
his name is zulu
and uh and i was there to fight the guy
and he have a trademark move which comes
like he starts and then he block himself
together don't get punched he get close
to you
put one hand between your legs and lift
you
and throw you back on the floor like
it's like a a move he always does
as he approached that i was quick move
myself back and hit him with my knee
with the best hit i could ever possibly
think
and in my mind
i said
i win the fight for sure it was a
knockout
and after this he just shook his hand
speed a tooth and
ready to promote i said wow
so that's take me out of my comfortable
zone in terms of
nothing is what i expect right and the
fight goes on for the because it was 10
minutes rounds unlimited number of runs
so
so when the first round stops
ends i was dead tired
full of his blood
and i was crawling to my my corner and i
said dad
there's no way i cannot go back there
and my dad might even listen to me he
says are you doing great you know he's
worse than you now you're gonna kick his
ass and this and that
said dad i'm serious i'm just dead here
i cannot go
and i start to argue with my dad and and
my brother halls throw me a bucket of
ice and water in my head
[Music]
and then the the round bang bangs like
bells again and i went to the fight
and like my dad said
i beat the guy in three minutes because
he's already tired i could get a good
position and choke him out
and i noticed my worst enemy at this
point was my own mind
playing tricks on me
tell me i don't have enough tell me i
was tired tell me i gonna lost
so my mind was completely against my
purpose
and i felt like i could not let this
happen ever
so after that fight i make a
a a a statement in my spiritual in my
mind i said i'm not gonna quit anymore i
have i prefer to die
then think i have to quit
so since then i already
created an element of i'm going with a
hundred percent and if if i fail trying
so be it but there's no quitting there's
no
expectations there's no oh that's got
harder and stuff so based on that
i bring myself mentally to a next level
was a
was an obstacle which to jump that
obstacle
i have to see life different after that
and were there things that you could do
to cement that so that you knew that you
would actually rise to that in the
moment yeah visualization
because in the water
arsenal we have different tools
we have physical tools like talent
mobility strength
coordination techniques
leverage angles
timing
but if you're talking about
mind we have different
tools visualization
emotional control
in the spiritual side we have hope
we have faith
we have patience
those elements they give you chance of
of letting the situation cook and in a
slow burn and see how it goes because
if you impatient if you don't have the
hope if you don't if you're not
believing yourself
sometimes you get caught in the middle
of the of your chores without you know
what what but if you fake you're gonna
find the light you're gonna find the
whole you're gonna you have the hope you
think is gonna do well so you become
smoother even in the bumpy rides
so i start to feel like my growth was
depending of this growth not only
physical not only mental
but also spiritual
yeah i find this warrior spirit
cultivating the mind getting yourself to
a place where you've rehearsed like
if i'm in this situation this is what
i'm prepared to do i'm going to go all
the way i'm utterly intoxicated by it
like i find this
when i think about what does it mean to
be a man that's part of it for me like
just that you it doesn't have to be
fighting but it does need to be that
warrior spirit that there's something
that you're so committed to
that you'll go all the way in the book
you talk about a moment where this
really got put to the test that
all of this stuff together hixson it it
almost seems impossible to believe that
it's one person but the time that i
think of as a japanese fighter shows up
at your
school
and fish hooks you
yes walk us through that story because
in the book you detail it so well and i
was like oh my god yes uh the situation
was after i become successful in japan
in the in the
mma scenario
professional wrestler in japan is big
it's huge
but professional wrestlers they have
fighting backgrounds they coming from
judo wrestling catch catch con
striking box so they tough fighters
but they fix fights
and i was invited to fight under their
arena
and i said in the magazine i could not
ever fight their champions and stuff
even though the rules are good because
they supposed to be fake
fixed fights then and doesn't give me
legitimacy so when you're losing there
has no
place no role on my
realistic view
and i said that and i said i i'm welcome
to bring those fighters to that to to
the rio arena which has rules which
are for real
and i hear nothing
and then couple of months later
the number one guy
was challenged before changed the
scenario for the number two guy which
was mean that guy like the the villain
of the the whole scenario you know one
of the big villains of the wrestling
world
and he said i i want to go to to los
angeles i'm going to kick your ass i'm
gonna beat you
and my friends japanese friends coming
oh anjou said he coming to fight you
weren't gonna say and i could not say
nothing about it because i'm not sure if
he's coming right i'm not sure when he's
coming
so i keep living my life naturally as
nothing happened because i could not be
prepared for i don't know when or what
eventually one day i was sleeping in my
house
because i don't teach the morning
classes the very early morning classes
so about 10 o'clock my instructor called
me
and said hickson we have a a
a
couple here wants to talk to you some
japanese guys
and immediate immediately i imagined the
fight the fighter was there to fight me
said okay i'll be right there
and i was with my
my
like pajamas and stuff
and i got into a car
my son was going with me so i give the
camera for him for him start to become
familiar with the camera and i start to
tape in my hands before i get on the
freeway you know
to get there ready to fight
and i get there my academy was in the
alley so soon i get into the alley i saw
a van full of japanese reporters with
cameras and stuff you see a crew
of a filming crew in there
and then i get i pull in
i get there was a couple a very tall guy
mr gracie how are you i said oh how are
you doing sir they are very well dressed
i'm president of the ufo the the
federation there
and i wonder because i want to invite
you to fight in japan i said man i told
you this before i don't want to fight in
japan for you guys
yeah but you also mentioned you could
fight for free
if the guy coming to you said yes and i
come here because i expect you to be the
fighter he said yeah but the fighter is
outside and then i realized
the fight was outside with the crew
can i pick him up can i call him i said
yes so as the guy approached going out
to pick up the fighter this is like out
of a movie i said to one to my students
which is also a bouncer and uh said man
stay on the door please
let the guy the president come in let
the fighter come in but keep the press
all out don't let the guys come in
and that's being said the guy come in
the fighter come in
and then
the guy was all kind of looking ugly
like look at everybody like this and i
said
for mr
sign the waiver because if somebody gets
hurt it's just a waiver to be signed
here you ask
and then lemon give it to him the
the waiver the guy look at the waiver
like this
and then the president called me said mr
gracie
that means if you don't sign the waiver
you're not going to fight
immediately i felt like a double trick
that because if i say you know he has to
sign he could leave
and tell i'm scared i'm afraid or i was
quitting whatever he said no no forget
the waiver throw the waiver out he come
in to fight
come over let's fight man and then the
fight begins
and i felt he was his approach was he
want to hit me hard on the face you know
his base the way he's positioned himself
comes more towards the striking mode
than actually grappling
[Music]
and based on that i i kind of played
myself a little
dummy for him to approach when he go for
the punch i deflected grab him under the
waist
lift throw him on the floor mounted and
i start to beat him up
but in my mind different than a regular
competition
was not about defeating the guy making
tap because if i make a clean victory
and make him tap he can stand up and say
nothing happens
so i have to show
physically the damage
so my intention is not just put him to
sleep or squeeze his arm was just
punching him in the face and after some
punches and break his nose and make him
very bloody
he turns back and i choke him out and
put him to sleep
and and as he's sleeping face down on
the ground i stood up until the press
could come in
so the press starts to come in and take
pictures of everything
and the president of the
his
his friend tried to cover his face
to don't show his old bloody and
stuff and then uh
the guy said to him gay now get out
let's clean his so it shows his face on
them
so and then
two days after
this guy coming to my place with a
samurai helmet
and offered to me as a gift sharing was
a lack of respect for him
and he's apologizing and he was
you know feel like i was honorable and
and
and gracious on defeating so he was
giving me a gift and left
did you live ready to fight at all times
at that period yes yes was no
time for preparing was just be in shape
all the time be ready to fight any time
because
that's why that's the only thing i could
do
yeah that's what i think makes your
family and your style of fighting
certainly in the era where you were the
number one so interesting is that is
born out of being ready for a street
fight it's born out of really being able
to defend yourself in a life or death
situation
not just
in the sport
how were you raised your dad seems to be
a very unique
character what what
values did he instill in you guys
my father was a very special guy because
he was very weak when he born
he learned jiu-jitsu
long before his practice in jujitsu
because he was forbidden by doctors to
practice his sport he could not run a
bike or run and play soccer because he
has verticals he passed out he was very
tense
and very weak physically
and he was learned from my uncle his
older brother
and
but he could not practice so when my
uncle opened his school on the 1925 in
rio de janeiro
my father was sitting on the corner for
about three years just watching my my
uncle teach different moves so he
memorized everything he knows everything
just by photograph
and he'd not exactly fighting because he
was forbidding
so in one day 16 years old
uh
a student come out come by and my uncle
has not arrived yet
so he said for the students mister if
you want to practice a little bit i can
play dummy for you i i can just
be aspiring for for a little while until
my brother arrives said oh i love to do
that kid let's go
so my dad engaged with the guy statue
practicing stuff half hour later my
uncle arrives
and the student said to my uncle said
carlos if you don't mind i love to keep
training with your your younger brother
because he's so talent he's so good i
love him
and that's my that engaged himself in
the practice but different than normal
persons
the choke for example was done
choking somebody using the arms
he could not do one pull-up he could not
do one push-up so he's weak
so instead using
power from the arms
he developed
power from the chest which comes much
more leverage and
minimizing the the real muscle effort
and gives more strength on the leverage
of the the action
so he starts adapting himself for the
jiu-jitsu he learned
and we compared elio gracie to jiu-jitsu
as einstein's to physics
he was inventor he creates things to to
modify things to adapt for himself
and that's why jiu jitsu gets once
arrives in brazil
this kind of special element of more
techniques or more softness or more
capabilities to adjust
especially fighting from the bottom
which my father could not ever fight
from the top
so he developed ways from the guard
position which he has opponent between
the legs to be able to not only be
comfortable against punches and so also
submit with triangle chokes armbars and
strikes so
he becomes very clever on that
aspect of fighting
so
with this being said my dad grew
as a general
as a
as a new modern view for jiu-jitsu and
make
not only his kids but his his nephews
parts of a clan
my uncle carlos always been a very
dedicated to create a clan
and my my my father elio was the guy who
is the the the
general for the army you know he was
more physical he was more giving talents
and my uncle has more the spiritual
guidance
giving more nutrition values for the
family
giving more sense of strategy
for the accomplishment so he was the guy
behind
with his mind
open for everything and my father was
the guy who was really
bringing the fight bringing the
techniques to the cousins and the family
so
when i'm born my father was already on
his 50s
so i could not have the experience of
him fighting
i could not remember those elements i
remember him more older
giving my brothers thanks for improving
my jiu-jitsu or guiding students or
talking about the federation talking
about the politics behind
so i get from him the impression was
he's the guy who leads all of us
to a better future to a better
representation to grow the family did he
push you guys to be tough or anything
like what were his
you know
he's very strong on morals
you know he's very strong on
i don't wanna you guys fight each other
so whoever is wrong
too many men is in the house
so whatever is wrong is better apologize
because if you not apologize when you're
wrong
and you guys fight for that when i
discover who is making the mistake this
guy will pay triple
so it's value guys arranged so i was
feeling confident to argue my brother
got the apple i was about to get
so give me the apple i was so i saw no
no so i'm gonna talk with my dad because
you're wrong the guy said okay kid take
this
because he keeps like a moral values he
keeps honesty he keeps
you know if you talk the truth
no matter what you're not gonna get
punished if you lie you get three times
more more punishment than you supposed
to have so
you did you who breaks this said i break
that
so don't do this again
that's pretty much it
was not big punishments because i tell
the truth if i lie
would be worse you know will be
different punishment so
we very early
understand how important is to be honest
the valuable
the integrity
the capacity for you because
a lot of what i learned from fighting
was in the dinner table seeing my dad
talking about resilience about
you know elements he passed on his fight
so i was
getting
that kind of information and applying on
my own life do you think that being
small and weak
influenced the way that he thought about
things like resilience 100
his possibilities he has to develop
possibilities outside outside of the
physical fight is physical
fight is brutal fight is violent how a
guy who is not physical can be fighter
he has to use strategy techniques
leverage
angles
you know and that's
bring a completely different dimension
it's so interesting that he took to that
so well that he could just watch it and
then be able to do it instantly and then
be able to innovate
it's uh it's really pretty impressive
yes
now is he unique like that or have there
been other people that have added he was
just genuine he's just a special
character who
he not only devote himself fully to
jiu-jitsu passionately he's very
passionate about
but he has the coordination and the
talents
sometimes he spend eight months without
going to the sidewalk
he's spending on the gym eating sleeping
on the gym waking up training sleep
without going to the the beach without
going to the
bar or the nothing it's just spend
eating on the school so it's
unbelievable how much passion and
dedication yeah it's interesting like
that so there's a quote i forget who
said it aristotle or somebody that the
only impossible job is raising kids
and one thing i know you've talked a lot
about is when you're coaching or being a
parent that you have to first assess
what that person is like what they need
and then give that to them where did
that insight come from
yes
one time i was start reading to helping
my brother to teach as a dummy for him
so he pulled me lay down hixon john
mount
so i was playing the dummy for the
student practice day whatever they so i
was there and he gave me a little tip in
the end of the class
for me to buy ice cream whatever so i
started making little money
from my brother
and i got my dad and said dad what i
should do
to be the best teacher
he said if you want to be a good teacher
you learn the choke you learn the arm
lock
with precision with details and then
pass through the student and ask him to
get tight here or there so give him the
details of the technique
if you want to be an excellent teacher
you have to capture what the student
needs to learn
so with that advice he gave me the sense
so i cannot be just a jiu jitsu teacher
i had to be a psychologist too
because i have to approach a guy who's
tense
insecure in a different way than
approach a guy who's just lazy and
completely off
so the whole tone of the class the whole
inspiration the whole talk
talking process thought process has to
be different from one to another i
cannot teach a girl as i teach a boy i
cannot their aspirations are different
so based on that sense i start to
realize
jiu-jitsu has a lot to do with the
mindset with the approach
because we all need to learn
something from martial arts
but sometimes you're not aggressive
you're not mean you're not a competitor
that doesn't mean you need you don't
need to learn martial arts like martial
arts is not exactly just to win
so mindset is something you and i were
talking about before we started rolling
is being a common denominator among
people that are successful what elements
other than emotional control which we've
already talked about resilience we've
talked about but what elements of
do people need to be successful of
mindset
my developments my mental
spiritual and physical developments
they could reach a plateau
if i was not involved with breathing the
way i am
it's very interesting but
the only organs
are
capable to give
and receive informations
are the brain and the heart
other other than that
the word the body just works
but doesn't have influence
if you get a bad email
you immediately gonna get upset you're
gonna get claustrophobic you can get
emotional you can get
you know depressed
because your brain tells you you don't
you're not happy
sometimes you feel something
but doesn't heat your brain hit your
heart
and immediately you feel emotional you
feel sad you feel whatever because
you felt in your heart
the lungs
are the only organ who are capable to
have a connection a direct connection
with your brain
and with your heart
when i started training breathing
i started to felt a completely different
dimension of
death
and my sensibility and my capacity to
feel myself deeply
because
normally in average
people born people get slapped on the
butt start to cry
and then they feel like they know how to
breathe they can survive and then they
learn soccer they learn fighting they
learn
baseball they learn sports surf
and they live based on
the same breath
doing things
but the the real learning of your
breathing system is to learn how to
maximizing your ventilation
hyperventilation
to cope with the activities you plan to
do
the the perfect breeding system
give you hyperventilation
give you capacity for you to relax and
sleep in mood
give you capacity to be
sprinting
for longer not only for one breath take
so whatever you need from your body
even from your spiritual guidance
you have to drive by
a perfect breathing system
the breathing allowed you
to find yourself deep into the this your
system
what's the thing in your career that
you're most proud of
oh man
it's hard to say because was just a
continuous mode of
successful elements i'm undefeated
i have 400 over 450 fights jesus i never
i never win anyone by by by points i
always submit or knock out
so my career is very successful from
even for my retirement
maybe
the most imp thing i'm proud of
was after my biggest loss in my life
which is losing my son
with 18 years old
i
was confused for a while about three or
four years
in a dark not feeling appetite for
training for surfing
nothing really appeals to me i was
putting a lot of time on my guardian on
my hillside
just meditating and thinking
kind of little depressed
and but i allowed myself to to get deep
in the dark you know i allowed myself to
hug a stone and go to the lake and
stay deep on the thinking about suicide
or thinking about drugs thinking about
you know what's the purpose of life
being a very much
weak
in the purpose you know crying and not
feeling like no that's okay i'm strong
because if you try to hide the emotions
from yourself and try to
show everybody okay
you just making a patch which is not
working
so i have to feel like
weak and and and completely vulnerable
and then i get there
and in order for me to get out of this
this hole
one day i was meditating in a little uh
platform i did on top of the trees for
my son
and i was there and i thought about my
dad and my dad always saying
everything bad happens to you it's
always a good side of it and everything
good happens to you it's always a bad
side of it so nothing can be only bad
or only good
and i start thinking about
what could be good based on my my son's
departure
and i realized
time for me was always something i was
in charge about it
i could fight at will i could teach at
will i could i raised my kids i could my
dad i want to talk to okay not today i'm
going to surf tomorrow we talk i was
able to be in charge of my time and my
will
freely
and i realized with huxor's departure
we may never not have tomorrow tomorrow
may never happen
and i start to understand how important
for me was appreciation of today
our conversation today is the most
important thing for me now nothing can
be
better than this
for my attention for my focus for my
passion
for for the audience for you i want to
be present here i want to be fully
so when this is over i will think about
what's next
so being present
make you make a big difference and
thinking about my son thinking about
that
i give you a glimpse of how i change if
i going for a fight in japan now and i'm
on the freeway
or a seminar or something a show or
something
and my daughter called me dad i need to
talk to you i said what's happened
sweetheart yeah because she starts to
cry i will stop my car in the freeway
talk to her
try to resolve the problem get into the
depth of the situation because whatever
i have to say how long it takes i will
be there for her
and after i turn it off i will see if i
still able to get the flight
if my trip has to be canceled if
whatever is going to happen after i will
deal with
but i'm not going to say srihar i go to
japan i call from nearby
i never will do this anymore
so
my appreciation for time becomes
different and i'm grateful for hawks on
departure because now he gave me a
completely different perspective of how
i should live my life
and how i appreciate my time
and how much
i kind of tight the notch for not
getting loose gaps and and be just
not concerned about things that matter
today my day is based on
what i can do best to make my best day
today i have to walk the dog i have to
do things which are
i feel complete if i do what i have to
do if i leave my dog without her
i will feel like wow man i let him down
so i want to do my best day
no matter if he's walking the dog no
matter if he's
helping somebody to to go to costco to
to make
bite stuff no matter if i have to fix my
my roof
whatever i have to do i'm focused and
grateful and help and happy about it
in my way so
the appreciation for that those elements
coming from my understanding
and maybe was maybe the biggest change
the biggest
progressive positive move i did in my
life since i know myself
was exactly that kind of positive change
and then after i understood that
i think about hawks so i'm happy
i thinking about my possibilities i'm
happy and inspired with the moves i do
to jiu-jitsu through my federation
through my
so my life changed because what was my
biggest loss
becomes my biggest
sign of how i should do to have a happy
life
it was really heartbreaking reading in
the book about that i didn't realize
that you had lost your son
when you think about that like the
spirit of you know a kid growing up in
your family and how hard they have to
fight
how do you like
rein them in you have a really
interesting philosophy about how much
you can
guide and then at some point you have to
let them be them how do you do that when
you know like
that it you know tomorrow isn't
guaranteed like that seems so difficult
yes my father has 10 kids
so
not all are champions not all are fired
we all involved in jiu-jitsu but
in the sense of education we we bring
they bring judges to my attention they
bring they sport jiu-jitsu to my
attention they bring the philosophy of
martial arts to my attention
and i could be a doctor
i could be a police officer i could be
other things
was but it was
underneath pressure which you grace
you're supposed to be a fighter
so i know what my direction was
but i have to recruit my my courage
my desire
my sacrifice which a lot of members of
the family doesn't
doesn't feel like oh man too much
training today i hurt myself
i'm not gonna go back there next day so
it's a different elements too
to combine the experience i have
what's the information i get
with the dedication and the and the and
the compromise i put myself in so it's
it's a dual thing
nobody could make me what i am if i was
not
focused and passionate about it
so my dad com make his
put his part on it but also i put my
part on it my commitment
one example is i was 12 years old
i was very
orange belt practicing in a group class
with adults
they they have fun with me they're not
hurting or anything
so i was there playing and then one time
i fly to uh a strong man not tough guy
but just tough just strong and he got me
in a headlock
and headlocks technically are not
exactly to make you tap
it's a position which is very
uncomfortable but you can resist
i was tired i was a kid the guy was very
strong and i tap
and i got so upset
because it was claustrophobic was not
about the pain or the the submission was
about the agony
and i get panicky and i tap
and i was upset i cried a little bit the
guy said what's your cake now i'm okay
thank you
and i went home with that in my mind
and i get home in a in rio de janeiro
like summer time 120 degrees heal me
it's like
unbelievable
i laid down myself in a carpet almost
like that i lay down myself on the
corner of the the carpet like this
and i tell my brother holt to roll me up
like a burrito
and just take me off here in 10 minutes
leave me 10 minutes here for me too
to get claustrophobic in this feeling so
i was enrolling the carpet all dark
smelling bad
get claustrophobic at first and then
eventually i started thinking about the
beach the seagulls the wind the breeze
on my face start to get calm
and i start to
take the panicking out of my system
and then he unfold me from there
in the same year i did three more times
the same experience
until i felt like was just another day
in the park just do this like
and i look
so
that shows my commitment with my own
fears with my own
i was upset because i got panicked and i
was trying to fix my panic on the carpet
in home
was not a doctor it was not a pill was
not a conversation was just
brutally
stay in the hole until you get killed
you know it's like
so that's kind of commitment i have in a
very early age to be the best i can be
and for me breathing was always a not a
problem but it was something which
when you get panic you panic man
everything all the strategy all the
thinking all the the goes to the to the
to the drain
so i was focused on naga panic and then
i learned how to breathe
and this was the missing link in my life
the breath the breath i saw you also do
like cold water exposure it seemed like
you did a lot of things to make yourself
extraordinarily uncomfortable yes in a
functional strength i never learned
functional strength i invent functional
strength in my mind
playing with elastics which i never
heard about i bought elastics from
diving the ones you put on the
you just had an intuitive sense that it
would work yeah you have to be a resist
a consistent resist and i have to move
but with resist so i i put in elastics i
put in
light weights and start to do like crazy
and also the cold water
cold water is a very important treatment
for me because
if you're thinking about something who
gonna scare you the most
is get burned alive
second is get cold water because
give you chills from immediately like i
don't like that it's like putting a cat
in the water i hate that every touch
every coff is is the uncomfortable
superb you're just not gonna get killed
you're going to get hurt but mentally
you could not be in a more stressed
situation than being the ice
so
i felt that will be a good
learning ground for me
so i was using the ice bets how'd you
get introduced to that like you're doing
stuff back in the i mean are we talking
the 80s like yes you're doing this stuff
back in the 80s i didn't hear about this
stuff until like 2015. i mean this is
yes crazy because
i was seeking for things were giving me
tools and emotions and
i love to play with nature because
nature is unbreakable nature is stronger
so surf for me plays always a double
role first this part of surfing the the
delightful element of playing the ocean
[Music]
second is the energy of the ocean is how
the ocean moves and you cannot fight the
ocean you have to go into the channel if
you get caught if you lost your board
you cannot just
swimming back through the channel you
have to get pounding on your head and go
from the waves
so you have to have a is a is a
is a ways to do it to deal
one time i lost my board and i had very
heavy surf
in the in the very late afternoon
i was by myself in the ocean and i lost
and the i i said i think about the bet
the last set i wouldn't get
so i get one more wave a guy deep so i
was about to get this set
i got one pound in the head and i broke
my leash
and i was already out there
getting dark by myself with the channel
pushing me towards the ocean
and i was by myself so
i have to be calm enough to to just go
through the ocean
and then eventually
go sideways through the along the beach
for about
an hour and ten minutes and then go back
to the ocean to back to the sand and i
arrive on the sand
about nine o'clock at night
thanks god for for being alive and lost
my board
but that's give me a sense of
calmness
and the pressure and and
so i was not intent to do that
but as i put myself in that situation i
could use this as a positive experience
so hixson you're now moving into a
different phase of your life do you feel
as alive now as you did when you were a
champion or
do you think about it differently
no i don't feel better
but thankful
i'm not feel worse
because what i could
do with very very graciously and very
motivated inspired for me
was lost was changing the focus from
if you imagine yourself in a pyramid i
always focus on the top of the pyramid
efficiency
and competition and
proving jiu-jitsu is the best
for the last 25 years or so
jiu-jitsu has been growing based on the
and and becomes more competition aspect
tournaments and submission tournaments
grappling tournaments
and and they become
i feel like they're losing the the
martial arts spirit becomes a game
without that spirit
and now for me my goal is not only not
to force or to show details for better
fighters
but to give a more accessible base
for people who are not fighters and they
need something to really grow
because
if you put yourself in perspective of
of how much you can grow from jiu-jitsu
practice
i tell you you can double
your perception of yourself in terms of
of
understand your gauges of tiredness of
sharpness in your mind possibilities of
strategy
calmness emotional control everything
you have
you don't put a test because you're not
playing jiu-jitsu when you start your
playing
you start to understand the physicality
the under the techniques the movements
and that's give your perception which i
call invisible power
you start to develop a better sense of
balance
deflection and not get punched
or how to respond to so based on that
learning process
you start to become more confident
you start to
humanize yourself another big problem i
see today
is the fact
technology
robotics internet dehumanize you
we become half humans and half
this universe we live here
so you can be anywhere you can talk with
anyone you can see any tree
so everything is there
but it's not the ability to shake hands
to look somebody in the eye to just for
a job to talk with a girl to to be
present human you know we are humans we
have to eat we have to
to connect
relationships so
dehumanizing doesn't make you strong in
relationships
doesn't make you strong
in in your presence
jiu-jitsu just the hug just the
breathing together just
give you that sense of presence the
sense of
of connection which is very important
and you not feel how much is important
for you but because you're not
sometimes you feel like you spend your
time without feeling a hug feeling the
sweat feeling something which is very so
jiu-jitsu can also help you in that
matter of
of supporting your life
not for the fight because today
this
is weenie fighting
this is win without a fight i can give
you tools for you to become more
peaceful
more connected with yourself more
sensitive to others better in
relationships better in your
sense of
believing in yourself for endeavor
and you're not gonna you don't have to
spar with nobody
the concepts i change
in my teaching progress now
is before
in the first month you're gonna learn
some techniques and you in the first
month and the end of the first month
you're already sparring
and that sparring session
can be very positive for some warriors
but can be jeopardizing a lot of guys
who are not designed to fight
in what way does it jeopardize them
emotionally yeah because if you come
into learn techniques and you amazed by
oh i like the tech and you come in and i
put you to spa
with a 17 year old brutal aggressive
with nothing in the head and he coming
to grab him
okay so hurts and discomfortable in
agony
and you're gonna say four i don't i
don't i don't want that in my life the
guy is stupid he's
so if you get too soon involved with the
the actual
competition aspect
jeopardizing your your learning process
in martial arts which i believe
the first year
right now i'm sure the first year of
practice has to be
learning
practicing with
a training partner
not with an opponent the opponent you're
just going to face
not in the first month not in the second
month but you're just going to face when
you say yeah i feel like i want to
learn a little more how to get a belt
and so now you're going to start you
don't go here john come here so you try
to see who falls on top and then you
start the competition but
you have first to get under a deep
understanding of the the purpose and the
ideas
and you may never like
to to compete
and you're going to say you know what
hicks i want to keep the the
the fundamentals program which i feel in
shape i feel the knowledge i feel the
possibilities
i add to my myself but i don't want to
compete you know i just don't like it
because the average
attendance for a jiu-jitsu school those
days is for every 10 students who come
into your to the class
new students eight will live in less
than six months
wow so that drop off means
that it's too hard too soon
you know if i keep under my attention i
can keep a student
passionate about for the first two years
easy
and he's getting shape he gets to learn
how to to do the things but he don't
have to inspire
hixon your
wisdom is
incredible what you've learned from
fighting and just life in general is
really breathtaking the book was amazing
thank you your life story is truly
unbelievable it is inspiring in ways
that i can't articulate where can people
connect with you where can they buy the
book
uh the my my new site now is hickson dot
academy
the book is all over is like
a big release in the four corners of the
world japan
europe
u.s brazil
so it's not going to be hard to find
what's the title for people breed
because breed i think was the
is the initial process of enlightenment
and performance and
understanding and spirituality if you
cannot control your heart if you're
gonna control your brain you're in bad
shape
so breathing is a big inspiration for me
and was the turning point of my
evolutionary process
yeah the book is really amazing thank
you my brother thank you so much for
coming on my pleasure guys trust me
you're going to want to read the book if
you don't already know who he is you are
going to be absolutely blown away the
book is part memoir it's all mindset
it's exactly what he did to become
arguably the greatest fighter of all
time when you get into like real
fighting circles this is the name that
comes up over and over and over again
uh the documentary choke
one watch of that and you will
understand exactly why
uh it's it is a career that's truly
unparalleled and uh i think you guys
will get a lot out of reading the book
and spending time with him online it's
really really extraordinary and speaking
of things that are extraordinary if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
you know a lot of us are going through a
hard time in life some people have been
bullied some people are just stressed
out some people are insecure some people
are fat and overweight
and the world puts a lot of this in
your mind
it's not just you yeah you help it